---
# Documentation: https://sourcethemes.com/academic/docs/managing-content/

title: "Conditional Probability"
linktitle: "conditional probability"
slug: chapter-1-probability-conditional-probability
summary: ~
date: 2019-09-26T11:51:56-05:00
lastmod: 2020-03-05T11:51:56-05:00
draft: false  # Is this a draft? true/false
toc: true  # Show table of contents? true/false
type: docs  # Do not modify.
weight: 2

# Add menu entry to sidebar.
# - Substitute `example` with the name of your course/documentation folder.
# - name: Declare this menu item as a parent with ID `name`.
# - parent: Reference a parent ID if this page is a child.
# - weight: Position of link in menu.
menu:
  courses:
    name: Conditional Probability
    parent: Chapter 1. Probability
    weight: 2
---

## Conditional probability and independence of events

The probability of an event will sometimes depend upon whether we know that other events have occurred. This is easier to explain with an example.

### Conditional probability

Suppose we roll two fair six-sided dice. What is the probability that the sum of the two dice is $8$? Using the procedure above, we can easily get
$$
P(E) = \frac{|E|}{|S|} = \frac{|\{(2, 6), (3, 5), (4, 4), (5, 3), (6, 2)\}|}{6 \times 6} = \frac{5}{36}
$$
What if we know the first roll is $3$? That would be another event:
$$
\begin{aligned}
    F &= \\{\text{first roll is } 3\\} \\\\
    E' &= \\{ \text{sum is } 8 \text{ given } F \\}
\end{aligned}
$$
Given the first die is $3$, requiring the sum to be $8$ is equivalent to requiring the second roll to be $5$. So the probability is
$$
P(E') = \frac{|E'|}{|S'|} = \frac{|\{(3, 5)\}|}{|\{(3, 1), \cdots, (3, 6)\}|} = \frac{1}{6} \neq \frac{5}{36}
$$
Formally speaking, let $E$ be the event that sum is $8$, and $F$ be the event that the first roll is $3$. The `conditional probability` of $E$ given $F$ is denoted $P(E \mid F)$, and $P(E)$ is the unconditional probability of $E$. If $P(F) > 0$, then
$$
\begin{equation}P(E \mid F) = \frac{P(EF)}{P(F)} \label{eq:conditional-prob} \end{equation}
$$


To understand this, keep in mind that any event $E$ can be decomposed into $(EF) \cup (EF^C)$. From Eq. $\eqref{eq:conditional-prob}$, we can derive
$$
\begin{equation} P(EF) = P(E \mid F)P(F) \end{equation}
$$
Now we can revisit the example above:
$$
\begin{gather*}
    \text{Let } E = \\{\text{sum} = 8\\}, \quad F = \\{ \text{first}\\} = 3. \\\\
    P(E \mid F) = \frac{P(EF)}{P(F)} \\\\
    P(EF) = \frac{|\\{(3, 5)|\\}}{|S|} = \frac{1}{36} \\\\
    P(F) = \frac{|\\{ (3, 1), \cdots, (3, 6) \\}|}{|S|} = \frac{6}{36}
\end{gather*}
$$
The conditional probability can also be generalized to more than two events using the `multiplication rule`:
$$
\begin{equation}\begin{split}
    &\quad P(E_1)P(E_2 \mid E_1)P(E_3 \mid E_1 E_2) \cdots P(E_n \mid E_1 E_2 \cdots E_{n-1}) \\\\
    &= P(E_1) \frac{P(E_1E_2)}{P(E_1)} \frac{P(E_3E_1E_2)}{P(E_1E_2)} \cdots \frac{P(E_nE_1E_2 \cdots E_{n-1})}{P(E_1E_2 \cdots E_{n-1})} \\\\
    &= P(E_1 E_2 \cdots E_n)
\end{split} \end{equation}
$$

### Cards example

Suppose we have a deck of $52$ cards, and we randomly divided them into $4$ piles of $13$ cards. Compute the probability that each pile has exactly $1$ ace.

There are four houses in a deck of cards: Hearts, Diamonds, Clubs and Spades. We can define events $E_i, i = 1, 2, 3, 4$ as follows
$$
\begin{aligned}
    E_1 &= \\{ \text{Ace of Hearts is in any pile} \\} \\\\
    E_2 &= \\{ \text{Ace of Hearts and Diamonds are in different piles} \\} \\\\
    E_3 &= \\{ \text{Ace of Hearts, Diamonds and Clubs are in different piles} \\} \\\\
    E_4 &= E = \\{ \text{All four aces are in different piles} \\}
\end{aligned}
$$
The desired probability is $P(E_4)$.
$$
\begin{aligned}
    P(E_4) &= P(E_1 E_2 E_3 E_4) \\\\
    &= P(E_1) P(E_2 \mid E_1) P(E_3 \mid E_1E_2) P(E_4 \mid E_1E_2E_3) \\\\
    &= P(E_1) P(E_2 \mid E_1) P(E_3 \mid E_2) P(E_4 \mid E_3)
\end{aligned}
$$
$P(E_1) = 1$ because the ace of Hearts is always going to be in a pile. For $P(E_2 \mid E_1)$, we can calculate the probability of the two cards being in the same pile. As the remaining $12$ cards are equally likely drawn from the deck of $51$ cards,
$$
P(E_2 \mid E_1) = 1 - \frac{12}{51} = \frac{39}{51}
$$
Given $E_1E_2$, the ace of clubs can't be any of the $24$ cards in the two piles with the two aces.
$$
P(E_3 \mid E_2) = 1 - \frac{12 + 12}{50} = \frac{26}{50}
$$
and finally we have
$$
P(E_4 \mid E_3) = 1 - \frac{12 \times 3}{49} = \frac{13}{49}
$$
So $P(E_4) = 1 \cdot \frac{39}{51} \cdot \frac{26}{50} \cdot \frac{13}{49} \approx 0.105$.

### Independence of events

In general, the conditional probability $P(E \mid F) \neq P(E)$. We say $E$ and $F$ are independent when $P(E \mid F) = P(E)$. When $E$ is independent of $F$, we also have
$$
P(EF) = P(E)P(F)
$$
Two events $E$ and $F$ are `independent` if any of the following holds:
$$
\begin{cases}
    P(E \mid F) = P(E) \\\\
    P(F \mid E) = P(F) \\\\
    P(EF) = P(E)P(F)
\end{cases}
$$
Otherwise we say $E$ and $F$ are dependent. Independence is denoted by $E \perp F$.









