---
title: "Vector Space"
date: 2020-08-31T13:13:34-04:00
summary: "" # appears in list of posts
categories: ["Linear Algebra"] # main category; shown in post metadata
tags: [] # list of related tags

slug: "linear-algebra-vector-space"
toc: true # table of contents button in post

# featured posts are shown on the homepage
featured: false
draft: true

weight: 30 # smaller values are listed first

# full-width featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your page's folder, or
# fill the unsplash_id and the photo will be automatically retrieved.
header_image:
    caption: "Ocean clouds seen from space." # Give credits here, or whatever captions you want to add (support markdown)
    unsplash_id: "yZygONrUBe8" # Unsplash ID of the picture
---

## Definitions

Associated with any matrix is a very important characteristic called the rank. There are several ways
of defining the rank, and the most fundamental of these is in terms of the dimension of a linear space.

### Vector space

A non-empty set of vectors $V$ is called a `vector space` (or linear space) if:

1. For all $\boldsymbol{x}, \boldsymbol{y} \in V$, $\boldsymbol{x} + \boldsymbol{y} \in V$, i.e. $V$ is closed under addition.
2. For all $\boldsymbol{x} \in V$, $k \in \mathbb{R}$, $k\boldsymbol{x} \in V$, i.e. $V$ is closed under scalar multiplication.

The second condition implies that the zero vector is always included in any vector space $V$. Alternatively, we may say that $V$ is closed under linear combination, i.e.

$$
k_1 \boldsymbol{x}_1 + \cdots + k_n \boldsymbol{x}_n \in V
$$

for all $\boldsymbol{x}_1, \cdots, \boldsymbol{x}_n \in V$ and $k_1, \cdots, k_n \in \mathbb{R}$.

For example, below are some valid/invalid vector spaces:

1. $V = \\{(x, y)^\prime: x \in \mathbb{R}, y \in \mathbb{R}\\}$ is a vector space.
2. $V = \\{(x, y)^\prime: x > y\\}$ is not a vector space.
3. $V = \\{(x, y, 0)^\prime: x \in \mathbb{R}, y \in \mathbb{R}\\}$ is a vector space.
4. $V = \\{(x, y, z)^\prime: 2x = y, x \in \mathbb{R}, y \in \mathbb{R}, z \in \mathbb{R}\\}$.

### Subspace

A set $W$ is a `subspace` of a vector space $V$ if $W \subset V$, and $W$ itself is a vector space.

For example, $V = \mathbb{R}^2 = \\{(x, y)^\prime \mid x \in \mathbb{R}, y \in \mathbb{R}\\}$ is a vector space. Let

$$
W_1 = \\{ (x, y)^\prime: y-2x = 0, x, y \in \mathbb{R} \\}
$$

We first check if $W_1$ is a subset of $V$. For any element $\boldsymbol{u} = (u_1, u_2)^\prime \in W_1$ such that $u_2 = 2u_1$, as $\boldsymbol{u}$ is a $2 \times 1$ vector, $\boldsymbol{u} \in V = \mathbb{R}^2$.

Then we need to show that $W_1$ itself is a vector space by showing that $W_1$ is closed under linear combination. For all $\boldsymbol{u}, \boldsymbol{v} \in W_1$, $\boldsymbol{u} = (u_1, u_2)^\prime$ such that $u_2 = 2u_1$, $\boldsymbol{v} = (v_1, v_2)^\prime$ such that $v_2 = 2v_1$, consider

$$
a \boldsymbol{u} + b \boldsymbol{v} = (au_1 + bv_1, au_2 + bv_2)^\prime \in W_1 \quad \forall a, b.
$$

We need to show that $2(au_1 + bv_1) = au_2 + bv_2$, which is obvious. Therefore $W_1$ is a subspace.

Let

$$
W_2 = \\{ (x, y)^\prime: y - 2x + 1 = 0 \\}
$$

Following the same procedure, we can show that $W_2$ is not closed under addition and therefore is not a subspace.

### Span

Let $V$ be an ambient vector space ($\mathbb{R}^2, \mathbb{R}^3, \cdots$). Let $S = \\{\boldsymbol{u}_1, \cdots, \boldsymbol{u}_m\\}$[^v-and-s] where $\boldsymbol{u}_1, \cdots, \boldsymbol{u}_m \in V$. The `(linear) span` of $\boldsymbol{u}_1, \cdots, \boldsymbol{u}_m$, or $S$, is the set that contains all linear combinations of $\boldsymbol{u}_1, \cdots, \boldsymbol{u}_m$. The span is denoted:

$$
\begin{aligned}
    W &= \mathscr{L}(\boldsymbol{u}_1, \cdots, \boldsymbol{u}_m) = span(\boldsymbol{u}_1, \cdots, \boldsymbol{u}_m) \\\\
    &= \left\\{ \boldsymbol{u} \mid \boldsymbol{u} = \sum\_{i=1}^m k_i \boldsymbol{u}_i, k_i \in \mathbb{R} \right\\}
\end{aligned}
$$

[^v-and-s]: The difference between $V$ and $S$ is that $S$ is a finite set.

We say $W$ is spanned or generated by $S$, or by $\boldsymbol{u}_1, \cdots, \boldsymbol{u}_m$. For example,

$$
\boldsymbol{u}_1 = (1, 0, 0)^\prime, \quad \boldsymbol{u}_2 = (0, 1, 1)^\prime
$$

$W = \mathscr{L}(\boldsymbol{u}_1, \boldsymbol{u}_2)$ contains all possible linear combinations of $\boldsymbol{u}_1$ and $\boldsymbol{u}_2$, such as $(0, 0, 0)^\prime$, $(1, 2, 2)^\prime$, etc.

**A span is a subspace.** Let $W = \mathscr{L}(\boldsymbol{u}\_1, \cdots, \boldsymbol{u}\_m)$ where $\boldsymbol{u}\_i \in V$. For any $\boldsymbol{w} \in W$, $\boldsymbol{w} =\sum\_{i=1}^m c_i \boldsymbol{u}_i \in V$ because $V$ is a vector space. Also for any $\boldsymbol{w}, \boldsymbol{v} \in W$,

$$
a\boldsymbol{w} + b\boldsymbol{v} = a\sum_{i=1}^m c_i \boldsymbol{u}_i + b\sum_{i=1}^m d_i \boldsymbol{u}_i = \sum_{i=1}^m (ac_i + bd_i)\boldsymbol{u}_i,
$$

which is a linear combination of the $\boldsymbol{u}_i$'s in $W$.

#### Spanning set

Let $V$ be a vector space (ambient space or a subspace of that). Suppose there exists a set of vectors $\boldsymbol{u}_1, \cdots, \boldsymbol{u}_m$ in $V$ such that for any $\boldsymbol{u} \in V$, we can express $\boldsymbol{u}$ as a linear combination of $\boldsymbol{u}_1, \cdots, \boldsymbol{u}_m$. Then we say $\\{ \boldsymbol{u}_1, \cdots, \boldsymbol{u}_m \\}$ is a `spanning set` of $V$.
